[docs] migrate Behat page (#270)
moodle/devdocs: general/development/tools/behat/writing.md

---
title: Writing acceptance tests

> sidebar_position: 1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sidebar_position: 2
```

These three stages match the standard [Four-phase test pattern](http://xunitpatterns.com/Four%20Phase%20Test.html). The fourth phase is 'tear-down' which is performed by Moodle between each test and does not need to be explicitly defined in your test.

:::note

Each test should have only one use of **Given**, **When**, and **Then**.
See [MDLSITE-3778](https://tracker.moodle.org/browse/MDLSITE-3778) for information and the policy decision on why you should not have multiple Given, When, and Then steps.

:::

Where you have several Given, When, and Then steps you should use the words **And**, and **But**, for example:

```gherkin
Given the following user exists:
  | username   | ccolon             |
  | First name | Colin              |
  | Last name  | Colon              |
  | email      | ccolon@example.com |
And the following course exists:
  | Name      | Jump Judging (Level 1) |
  | Shortname | sjea1                  |
When I log in as "ccolon"
And I navigate to "Site home > Jump Judging (Level 1)"
Then I should see "You are not enrolled in this course"
But I should see "Enrol now"
```

> To initialize and run your tests, please follow the instructions of [Running acceptance test](/general/development/tools/behat/running).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::tip

To initialize and run your tests, please follow the instructions of [Running acceptance test](/general/development/tools/behat/running).

:::
```

    And I am on "Course 1" course homepage
```

Again you can define specific tags. Afterwards you write the steps, which should be executed during your test.

### Multiple Scenarios

You can have an arbitrary amount of scenarios within a test. Please make sure they all belong to the same feature.
If you have certain steps, which should be executed for every scenario of a feature, you can define them using a background:

```gherkin
Background:
    Given the following "courses" exist:
      | fullname | shortname | category | groupmode |
      | Course 1 | C1        | 0        | 1         |
    And the following "users" exist:
      | username | firstname | lastname | email |
      | teacher1 | Theo | Teacher | teacher1@example.com |
```

This is usually used, to define the different **GIVEN** steps.

### Use existing steps

There are different ways how to effectively browse the available existing steps:

#### Moodle Administration

Moodle offers within its administration menu under Site Administration > Development > Acceptance Testing a complete and searchable list of all available step definitions.
However, make sure you installed the behat test site first!

> #### PhpStorm

Reviewer: I think it would be better to create a generic reference to IDE's (to avoid specific tools). That way, it will be easier to maintain ;-)

To begin, you need a [generator](https://docs.moodle.org/dev/Writing_PHPUnit_tests#Generators) in `/*your*/*plugin*/tests/generator/lib.php`. If you are generating a type of entity called "thing", your generator will need a method called create_thing, which accepts an object:

```php
class local_myplugin_generator extends component_generator_base {
    public function create_thing($thing) {
        global $DB;
        $DB->insert_record('local_myplugin_things', $thing);
    }
}
```

Next, you will need to define your behat generator in `/*your*/*plugin*/tests/generator/behat_*your_plugin*_generator.php`, with the `method get_createable_entitites()` method:

```php
class behat_local_myplugin_generator extends behat_generator_base {

    protected function get_creatable_entities(): array {
        return [
            'things' => [
                'datagenerator' => 'thing',
                'required' => ['name']
            ],
        ];
    }
}
```

> The 'datagenerator' value refers to the method in the generator class that we are calling, in this case `create_thing()`. The outer array key is the entity name we will use in the behat step, in this case `Given the following "local_myplugin > things" exist`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `datagenerator` value refers to the method in the generator class that we are calling, in this case `create_thing()`. The outer array key is the entity name we will use in the behat step, in this case `Given the following "local_myplugin > things" exist`.
```

  ],
  "features": [
    "auth/tests/behat/login.feature",
    "grade/tests/behat/grade_hidden_items.feature",
   ]
}
```

The above will:

1. disable the use of step_definitions from `behat_grade` and `behat_navigation` while running theme suite
1. disable running of scenarios in `auth/tests/behat/login.feature` and `grade/tests/behat/grade_hidden_items.feature`.

### Override core behat selectors

To override behat selectors in specific theme, you should create a class `behat_theme_{MYTHEME}_behat_selectors` in `/theme/{MYTHEME}/tests/behat/behat_theme_{MYTHEME}_behat_selectors.php` extending behat_selectors.

## Good practice

### Test one thing per scenario

The ideal that you should strive for, is that each scenario tests just one specific bit of functionality. Therefore, if one test fails, the scenario name should tell you exactly what the bug is. Also, any bug should cause just one scenario to fail, not lots of unrelated ones. If you can achieve this, then the idea is that it minimises the time from seeing a test fail to having fixed the bug that was detected. Of course, this ideal is not always achievable, but in my experience it is worth striving for.

> Note that this also implies that the Given, When and Then keywords should be used only once per scenario.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::tip

This also implies that, as mentioned before, the `Given`, `When` and `Then` keywords must be used only once per scenario.

:::
```

### Don't use XPath or CSS selectors - fix your Accessibility bugs

If, the only way you can identify something in the page that you want to manipulate is with a step like `I set the field with xpath "//textarea['answer')](contains(@name,)" to "frog"`, then this is probably the sign that you have an Accessibility bug, because Behat accesses the page very like a screen-reader user would.

You should be able to refer to things with steps like `I set the field "Answer" to "frog"'` or `I click on "True" "radio" in the "First question" "question"`. If not, you should probably think about fixing the accessibility bug, rather than resorting to unreadable selectors in your Behat test.

### When you define more steps in your plugin, make it clear they come from your plugin

When defining new Step definitions in your plugin, try to make sure the step name identifies it as belonging to your plugin. So, don't make a step called `I disable UI plugins`. Call it something like `I disable UI plugins in the CodeRunner question type`.

### PHPDoc comments to map scenario steps

> PHPDoc style comments before functions can be used to map to your .scenario files. Read more about this here
> 
> https://behat.org/en/latest/user_guide/context/definitions.html

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PHPDoc style comments before functions can be used to map to your `.scenario` files. Read more about this in the [defining reusable actions page](https://behat.org/en/latest/user_guide/context/definitions.html).
```
